# Ethical Code for Programming

If you take anything away from this chapter it's this:
    _Be the teacher you wish you had._
When you are a programmer, you are bound to work with other people, and when
you do, you have the opportunity to make an impact on them -- even if it's 
small. I am going to share with you some stories of my own experiences with
teachers and mentors. I will also share with you a code of ethics that I think
is important to follow as a programmer -- and more importantly, as a person. I
tell people this phrase all the time -- "Programs are for people, code is for
computers." This is a reminder that behind every line of code, although this
may be changing given the artificial intelligence evolution, there is a person
who wrote it. That line of code came from someone's mine. Someone who has a
story and has a life. I want you to remember as you read this chapter, that
programs are for people.

## My Teachers

My first teacher I want to tell you about was not a computer scientist. But to
me, they embodied the spirit of what a person should be. Her name was Nancy
Lindquist. I still call her to this day, Mrs. Lindquist. She was my 4th grade
teacher in a small town called River Falls in Wisconsin. I sat in her class 
for, what would have had to have been, over 150 days. I do not remember a 
single thing she ever taught me that was ever written on our tenuous smart
board. I do remember how she made me feel. I remember how she acted as a human
being. Before I talk about how she treated me, someone who has had a lot of
grace in my life, I want to tell you about how she treated people who were not
as fortunate as me.

### Treat Everyone Like She Treated Rob

There was a kid in my class, and to keep his identity safe, I will call him
Rob. Rob was a kid who was heavily affected by autism. He was the kind of kid
where people didn't want to be friends with him. They wanted to, excuse my
language Mrs. Lindquist, fuck with him without him knowing. They would try to
play tricks and talk to him knowing he may not understand that they were 
fucking with him. Those were the people who treated him in a special manner
with the worst intentions. There was also some very well-intentioned students
who would try to talk to him on what they thought would be on his "level." As
someone whose best friend has autism -- it's completely degrading to them to 
say that they are on a different intellectual level. They are not above or 
below you in any way -- they are different, just as we are all different.
Nevertheless, the way they would talk to him was with a tone, maybe an octave
above their speaking voice, talking to Rob like he was an infant. Yes, they
had good intentions, but what they did is they treated someone different as
special. Like he, especially, should be talked to in a pandering way.

What Mrs. Lindquist taught me is that everyone is special -- even me, who at 
that age, never felt special. She could tell everyone was special, but that
doesn't mean you treat them different. Here's what that means. The amount of
care that she gave to Rob was the same amount of care she gave to me. She
didn't just treat Rob with understanding and compassion, she treated everyone
that way. There was no doubt that she cared for Rob. She would sit and talk
with Rob many times during her lunch break in a classroom which was meant to 
be for people with special needs -- when she was in no way obligated to do so
given Rob had his own special needs supervisor. I will never forget all the 
times I walked into her classroom everyday where, instead of just sitting at
her desk rueing the lack of reward you get from that kind of job, she stood by
the door and once everyone had hung up their backpacks and jackets, she would
greet us all a different way. She would do high five, or a fist bump, or a
handshake for those of us less shy, or even a hug if one of those kids put 
their arms out. The point of this is, she did this to everyone, not just Rob.
What she taught me is that everyone needs that hug, needs that high five, 
needs that person to keep you after class and making sure your doing ok.

## What does this have to do with programming?

There are many people in the programming world who act elitist. I could list
them endlessly, but the most obvious one is Linus Torvalds. He is well known
as the infamous creator of the Linux kernel. Good for him, that's a real
accomplishment. But he is also known for being a real asshole. Telling people
they are stupid, that they are idiots, that they are morons. While there are
many people who have contributed to the Linux kernel, he known for doing much
of the work himself. This is quite fitting for him. He is the kind of person
who thinks programs are about the code within. It's not. Programs are about
the people who made them, and the people who use them. I would gladly give up
all the Linus Torvalds in the world if it meant we could have more Mrs.
Lindquists. I want you to understand, results are impressive, but character is
everything. If I never had a person like Mrs. Lindquist in my life, I may have
never felt special enough to start my own organization or meet the people I
have. There are millions of people out there who are just like me, who have
had a Mrs. Lindquist in their life, and you must understand that you have more
to you than what you do.

## The Principles

After hearing this story, I hope you understand the importance of treating
people with respect, no matter who they are. With this in mind, you have to
know that every line of code you write was written by a human being. With
this, the first code in the programmer code of ethics is:

1. **Tear down only in the effort of building again.**

Never tell someone their work is bad without giving them an effort to try to
and improve it. As programmers, we are all trying to build something, and just
being the demolition crew is not helpful if we don't know what we are 
demolishing for. I would even goe as so far as to say, you don't need to have
solutions in mind, but you should have at the least goals and principles that
you think are important to follow. I'll, give a basic example. Let's say 
someone writes in React.js code quite frequently and they are using a lot of
ternary operators. You could say, "You realize nobody will understand what 
this mean if they don't know what a ternary operator is?" What good would this
do? You are tearing down their edifice without any purpose. Instead, you could
say, "I think it would be more readable if you used if-else statements instead
of ternary operators." This is a constructive criticism. You are not just
telling them what they are doing wrong, you are building back up again. You
could even say "I don't know how common ternary operators are, do you think
there are more readable alternatives?" In this, we have said what we want 
without tearing down without purpose.